# Development of a Real-Time Safe Landing Zone Detection Algorithm for Drone Delivery Systems Using AI

Last-mile delivery for consumer packages has always been the most challenging phase of shipping due to being the most time-consuming, least cost effective, and least environmentally friendly part of delivery. Drone-based delivery offers a promising solution but faces a critical challenge in identifying safe landing zones (SLZs) in dynamic environments. 

This project utilized multiple aerial datasets, specifically segmenting and classifying areas into one of seven classes: paved surfaces, buildings, trees, low vegetation, vehicles, and humans/animals. Of the categories, a general assumption that paved surfaces are generally flat and obstruction-free and therefore safe will be made. Next, a U-Net model with a MobileNetV2 encoder was trained using tensorflow and optimized for deployment on a Raspberry Pi. To predict SLZs, an ellipse whose eccentricity is adjusted based on MPU6050 sensor pitch measurements to maintain perspective accuracy is inscribed within the model’s prediction for paved surfaces. The final model achieved 86% validation accuracy and 82.80% IoU for paved surfaces on validation images, meeting the initial goal of 80-90% for validation accuracy and 75-85% for IoU. However, for test accuracy and IoU, the values dropped to 59.27% and 46.91%. For live video tests, the inference rate ranged from 0.88 to 0.98 FPS, with an approximate 1-second latency. 

From these findings, this system could potentially supplement existing SLZ detection strategies and assist autonomous drones in making safer landing decisions by avoiding obstacles. However, the poor test metrics indicate that more optimization must be done before it would be a viable option. In future studies with further optimization, improved datasets, and more powerful processors, this SLZ detection method could enhance drone delivery safety and efficiency and could complement existing sense-and-avoid systems effectively.

[Project Notebook](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LUymSWrd0yI3r9PORYCFJDRxHgjmIJY3lzbzmNDvtbc/edit?usp=sharing)
